how many of you Bend Oklahoma City raise
your hand yeah how many of you have not
been to Oklahoma City and have no idea
who I am most of you let me let me give
you a little bit of background
Oklahoma City started in the most unique
way imaginable back on a spring day in
1889 the federal government held what
they called a land run they literally
lined up the settlers along an imaginary
line and they fired off a gun and the
settlers roared across the countryside
and put down a stake and wherever they
put down that stake that was their new
home and at the end of the very first
day the population of Oklahoma City had
gone from zero to 10,000 and our
planning department is still paying for
that the citizens got together on that
first day and elected a mayor and then
they shot him
that's not really all that funny but it
allows me to see what type of audience
I'm dealing with so I appreciate the
feedback the 20th century was fairly
kind to Oklahoma City our economy was
based on commodities so the price of
cotton or the price of wheat and
ultimately the price of oil and natural
gas and along the way we became a city
of innovation the shopping cart was
invented in Oklahoma City the parking
meter invented in Oklahoma City you're
welcome
having an economy though that relates to
commodities can give you some ups and
some downs and that was certainly the
case in Oklahoma City's history in the
1970s when it appeared that the price of
energy would never retreat our economy
was soaring and then in the early 1980s
it cratered quickly the price of energy
dropped our banks begin to fail before
the end of the decade 100 banks had
failed in the state of Oklahoma
there was no bailout on the horizon our
banking industry our oil and gas
industry our commercial real estate
industry were all at the bottom of the
economic scale young people were leaving
Oklahoma City in droves for Washington
and Dallas in Houston in New York and
Tokyo anywhere where they could find a
job that measured up to their
educational attainment because in
Oklahoma City the good jobs just weren't
there but long at the end of the 80s
came an enterprising businessman who
became mayor named Ron norick
Ron norick eventually figured out that
the secret economic development wasn't
incentivizing companies upfront it was
about creating a place where businesses
wanted to locate so he pushed an
initiative called maps that basically
was a pending on the dollar sales tax to
build a bunch of stuff it built a new
sports arena a new canal downtown it
fixed up our performing arts center of a
new baseball stadium downtown a lot of
things to improve the quality of life
and the economy indeed seemed to start
showing some signs of life the next
mayor came along
he started maps for kids rebuilt the
entire inner city school system all 75
buildings either built a new or
refurbished and then in 2004 in this
rare collective lack of judgment
bordering on civil disobedience the
citizens elected me mayor now the city I
inherited was just on the verge of
coming out of its slumbering economy and
for the very first time we started
showing up on the lists and you know the
list I'm talking about the media and the
internet loved to rank cities and in
Oklahoma City we had never really been
on lists before so I thought it was kind
of cool when they came out with these
positive lists and we were on there we
weren't anywhere close to the top but we
were on the list we were somebody best
city to get a job best city to start a
business
best downtown Oklahoma City
and then came the list of the most obese
cities in the country there we were now
I like to point out that we were on that
list with a lot of really cool places
Dallas and Houston and New Orleans and
Atlanta and Miami you know these are
cities that typically you're not
embarrassed to be associated with but
nonetheless I didn't like being on the
list and about that time I got on the
scales and I weighed 220 pounds and then
I went to this website sponsored by the
federal government and I typed in my
height I typed in my weight when I push
enter and it came back and said obese
what a stupid website
I'm not obese I would know if I was
obese and then I started getting honest
with myself about what had become my
lifelong struggle with obesity and I
noticed this pattern that I was gaining
about two or three pounds a year and
then about every 10 years I'd dropped 20
or 30 pounds and then I'd do it again
and I had this huge closet full of
clothes and I can only wear 1/3 of it at
any one time and only I knew which part
of the closet I could wear but it all
seemed fairly normal of going through it
well I finally decided I needed to lose
weight and I knew I could because I'd
done it so many times before so I simply
stopped eating as much I'd always
exercise that really wasn't the part of
the equation that I needed to work on
but I had been eating 3,000 calories a
day and I cut it to 2,000 calories a day
and the weight came off I lost about a
pound a week for about 40 weeks along
the way though I started examining my
city its culture its infrastructure
trying to figure out why our specific
city seemed to have a problem with
obesity and I came to the conclusion
that we had built an incredible quality
of life if you happen to be a car
but if you happen to be a person you are
combating the car seemingly at every
turn our city is very spread out we have
a great SEC intersection of Highways I
mean literally no traffic congestion in
Oklahoma City to speak up and so people
live far far away our city limits are
enormous
six hundred and twenty square miles but
15 miles is less than 15 minutes you
literally can get a speeding ticket
during rush hour in Oklahoma City and as
a result people tend to spread out lands
cheap we had also not required
developers to build sidewalks and new
developments for a long long time we had
fixed that but it had been relatively
recently and there were you know
literally hundred thousand or more homes
into our inventory in neighborhoods that
had virtually no level of walkability
and I I tried to examine how we might
deal with obesity and was taking all of
these elements into my mind I decided
that the first thing we needed to do was
have a conversation you see in Oklahoma
City we weren't talking about obesity
and so on New Year's Eve of 2007 I went
to the zoo and I stood in front of the
elephants and I said this city is going
on a diet and we're gonna lose a million
pounds well that's when all hell broke
loose
the national media gravitated toward
this story immediately and they really
could have gone with it one of two ways
they could have said this city is so fat
that the mayor had to put them on a diet
but fortunately the consensus was but
this is a problem in a lot of places
this is a city that's wanting to do
something about it and so they started
helping us drive traffic to the website
now the web address was this city is
going on a diet calm and I appeared on
The Ellen DeGeneres Show one weekday
morning to talk about the initiative and
on that day
150,000 visits were placed to our
website people were signing up and so
the pounds started to add up and the
conversation that I thought was so
important to have was starting to take
place it was taking place inside the
homes mothers and fathers talking about
it with their kids
it was taking places in churches
churches were starting their own running
groups and their own support groups for
people who were dealing with obesity
suddenly it was a topic worth discussing
at schools and in the workplace and the
large companies they typically have
wonderful wellness programs but the
medium-sized companies that typically
fall between the cracks on issues like
this they started to get engaged and
used our program as a model for their
own employees to try and have contests
to see who might be able to deal with
their obesity situation in a way that
could be proactively beneficial to
others and then came the next stage of
the equation it was time to push what I
called maps 3 now Maps 3 like the other
two programs had had an economic
development motive behind it but along
with the traditional economic
development tasks like building a new
convention center we added some
health-related infrastructure to the
process we added a new Central Park
70 acres in size to be right downtown in
Oklahoma City we're building a downtown
streetcar to try and help the
walkability formula for people who
choose
live in the inner city and help us
create the density there we're building
senior health and wellness centers
throughout the community we put some
investments on the river that had
originally been invested upon in the
original maps and now we are currently
in the final stages of developing the
finest venue in the world for the sports
of canoe kayak and rolling we hosted the
Olympic Trials last spring we have
Olympic caliber events coming to
Oklahoma City and athletes from all over
the world moving in along with
inner-city programs to get kids more
engaged in these types of recreational
activities that are a little bit
non-traditional we also with another
initiative that was passed our building
hundreds of miles of new sidewalks
throughout the metro area we're even
going back into some inner-city
situations where we had built
neighborhoods and we had built schools
but we had not connected the two we had
built libraries and we'd built
neighborhoods but we'd never really
connected the two with any sort of
walkability through yet another funding
source were redesigning all of our
inner-city streets to be more pedestrian
friendly our streets were really wide
and you'd push the button to allow you
to walk across and you had to run in
order to get there in time but now we've
narrowed the streets highly landscaped
them making them more pedestrian
friendly really a redesign rethinking
the way we build our infrastructure
designing a city around people and not
cars we're completing our bicycle trail
master plan we'll of over a hundred
miles when we're through building it out
and so you see this culture starting to
shift in Oklahoma City and lo and behold
the demographic changes that are coming
with it are very inspiring highly
educated 20-somethings are moving to
Oklahoma City from all over the region
and indeed even from further away in
California when we reached a million
pounds in January of 2012 I flew to New
York with some of our participants who
had lost over a hundred pounds whose
lives had been changed and we appeared
on the Rachael Ray Show and
that afternoon I did around the media in
New York pushing the same messages that
that you're accustomed to hearing about
obesity and the dangers of it and I went
into the lobby of Men's Fitness Magazine
the same magazine that had put us on
that list five years before and as I'm
sitting in the lobby waiting to talk to
the reporter I noticed there's a
magazine copy of the current issue right
there on the table
and I pick it up and I look at the
headline across the top and it says
America's fattest cities do you live in
one well I knew I did so I picked up the
magazine and I began to look and we
weren't on it then I looked on the list
of fittest cities and we were on that
list we were on the list of the 22nd
fittest cities in the United States our
State Health Statistics are doing better
granted we have a long way to go health
is still not something that we should be
proud of in Oklahoma City but we seem to
have turned the cultural shift of making
health a greater priority and we love
the idea of the demographics of highly
educated 20-somethings people with
choices choosing Oklahoma City and large
numbers we have the lowest unemployment
in the United States probably the
strongest economy in the United States
and if you're like me at some point in
your educational career you were asked
to read a book called The Grapes of
Wrath Oklahomans leaving for California
in large numbers for a better future
when we look at the demographic shifts
of people coming from the West
it appears that what we're seeing now is
the wrath of grapes
the grandchildren are coming home you've
been a great audience and very attentive
thank you very much for having me
[Music]